initial readme (#3)
brimsec/rayzar: README.md

## data model

The zq data model for analytics and search comprises a set of stored
data files in the zng format organized in a directory hierarchy that partitions
the data in an arbitrary fashion.
Typically, when it comes to logs arranged by time, the partitions are organized by
year-month-day, or year-month-day-hour, etc.  We presume here that while the data
is stored in chunks that are partitioned by time, data might
be sliced and diced different ways across an arbitrary number of files
within any given partition.

The zng data is indexed with [micro-indexes](https://github.com/brimsec/zq/tree/master/cmd/zar).
zar creates and manages the indexes. For the discussion here, we presume indexes
have been created and we will use zar to search the indexes and stream data to
Ray actors.  In these examples, zng logs and zar indexes are stored in the file
system of the local host and we run Ray in this prototype configuration all
on localhost.

## Ray

Ray provides a distributed computation model for python where you can create
stateful actors and run stateless tasks that all coordinate to carry out
distributed computation.  Actors store state as

> immutable objects that other actors and tasks can access.  Actors and
> tasks can launch other actors and tasks and the Ray scheduler and distributed
> object manager make everything work magically together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
immutable objects that other actors and tasks can access.  Actors and
tasks can launch other actors and tasks and the Ray scheduler and distributed
object manager coordinate activity across the cluster.
```

results are read in a blocking manner then they are return one-by-one via the
`next` method.)

For each matching file, a
[Ray task](https://github.com/brimsec/rayzar/blob/2b6efde844abc30eb60e3e700987d16de441febe/rayzardemo.py#L30)
is run to read the file by inefficiently execing zq, applying the specified zql filter,
and returning the data return by zq in one shot.

The [Aggregator class](https://github.com/brimsec/rayzar/blob/2b6efde844abc30eb60e3e700987d16de441febe/rayzardemo.py#L63)
is a Ray actor that aggregates together each of the results that is read and
filtered through the zq reader.

Upon completion, the binary
zng output of the merge aggregation is sent to standard out and in the command above,
converted it to text zng via `zq -t`.

This is all incredibly inefficient because all
the data is passed through the plasma object store --- this is just meant as a first cut
here to start brainstorming.  A better approach would be to have a data reader
efficiently read the filtered results straight into memory that could then be
operated upon before being resulted into the plasma object store in the Arrow format.

## incremental deployment model

> Supposing you had an existing deployment of stored data that was accessed by Ray,
> you could conceivably index this existing data with zar and add a search capability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have an existing set of data accessible by Ray,
you could conceivably index this data with zar and add a search capability
```

to any jobs that traverse the stored data file by file using the zar-find actor
from this example.  In fact, zar find could be parallelized by providing

> a different zar root to search for the set of files under that root that match.

Reviewer: `In fact, zar find ...` - I would drop this sentence, as it describes a particular sub-optimization for 'zar find' that distracts from the overall goal of the paragraph to introduce the concept of using indexes. The next sentence (`Then, any existing code ...`) still works without it.

aggregated very efficiently.  These aggregations have the property that
the overall result can be computed as a combination of partial results.

A "count" aggregation is an obvious example where if you partition
the data into two sets and count certain values in each set you can sum the
resulting counts to get the total count.  Sum, average, variance, set-union,
null, and so forth are all composable aggregations.  Large-scale joins
can also fit into this framework.

This concept isn't completely new.  Many existing systems
take advantage of the composable aggregations,
but when programming map-reduce jobs in a data lake,
you typically have to structure your code specifically to take
advantage of this property.  For example, in spark, you can use the
reduceByKey operator with an aggregation method instead of the standard
groupBy operator to cause partial aggregations to be computed at the
output stage of spark's map phase, a so called map-combine-reduce pattern.

So, let's talk about a hypothetical search query over some implied time range:
```
blah | sum(foo) by bar
```
This searches for all data that matches the pattern `blah` and

> sumsa the values of field `foo` with respect to each value in the field `bar`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sums the values of field `foo` with respect to each value in the field `bar`.
```

If the values of bar comprise a low-cardinality set, then this would work fine
and you could choose any level of parallelism.  However, if `bar` has high cardinality,
then the workers could run out of memory.

Unfortunately, you don't know ahead of time the cardinality of the group-by condition.

This is why hadoop map-reduce then spark were created.  Hadoop dealt with this
memory problem by spilling data to disk and shuffling and merging data from disk
to produce the output.  Spark improved upon this by trying to keep everything
in memory and doing more intelligent inter-cluster shuffles to avoid round-trips
to disk if and when possible.

Both hadoop and spark implemented the fully general map-reduce model.
But what if we focused on zql-style queries leveraging the typical case of
composable aggregations and integrate into the design the use of search indexes
during query traversals?  And what if this were all exposed as simple
unix tools that can be experimented with from the command-line without
setting up complex clusters?

### version 1: a static model

The hadoopy approach for all this is to just spill to disk.  Any aggregation

> (or sort etc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(or sort, or other grouping operation)
```

in a zql flowgraph will have a table, organized by a set of group-by or
sort keys (one or more of primary, second, etc key).  To deal with
memory limits, whenever this table hits a configured size limit (related
to the amount of memory dedicated to the worker),
it is simply spilled to disk by writing the entries to disk
in a key-sorted order.  At end-of-stream, the tables are all opened
and read in parallel and any entry that is common across the streams is
aggregated by the aggregation operator and the results are streamed
to the downstream entity.

This approach can be parallelized across N nodes where the time range of the
traversal is divided amongst the different nodes and the final step merges
the streamed results from all of the nodes.

That will work fine for many use cases.
For many aggregations, the group-by table will stay small when the cardinality
of the key space is low.
If you have a feel for how much memory you need ahead of time, you could
launch N jobs in parallel so a high-cardinality group-by table
gets split out efficiently.  In this case, the key space isn't disjoint

> but it might not matter much if the sub-cardinilaty of each key is small

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but it might not matter much if the sub-cardinality of each key is small
```

(meaning there is little advantage to a shuffle)
so in general this could work well depending on the underlying data
characteristic.  And if the memory limit is hit here, the table is spilled
to disk as above.

### version 2: a dynamic model

There are two key problems with the static approach.  First, you don't generally
know how to choose N so it's unreasonable to ask the user to specify this.

> And second, the key space is replicated over each node making the tables inefficient

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And second, partitioning the work by time means the key space is replicated over each node making the tables inefficient
```

and larger than they need to be.

A solution to these problems is, firstly, to fork a new worker only after the
aggregation table gets too big (thus providing scale-out memory along with
scale-out throughput) and, secondly, to implement a shuffle to
route the table rows to the worker that owns the row.  Ownership of rows
is handled like spark and map-reduce using a hash partition.  The
number of dynamics nodes would be limited either because the cluster

> manager (i.e., kubernetes) indicates no more resources are available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manager indicates no more resources are available
```

Author: I'm going to change i.e. to e.g. and leave this to imply that we don't need a custom cluster manager like ray and spark have.

A solution to these problems is, firstly, to fork a new worker only after the
aggregation table gets too big (thus providing scale-out memory along with
scale-out throughput) and, secondly, to implement a shuffle to
route the table rows to the worker that owns the row.  Ownership of rows
is handled like spark and map-reduce using a hash partition.  The
number of dynamic nodes is limited either because the cluster
manager (e.g., kubernetes) indicates no more resources are available
or a configured scale-out limit is hit.  Either way, when there are no
more available resources, workers then spill to disk.

In this approach, we begin with N=M workers for throughput parallelism then
dynamically add workers (increasing N) to provide additional memory scale-out
and throughput parallelism.  The traversal range is divided among the M workers
in some way (i.e., evenly divided, partitioned with a block/M stride, etc)

When a worker hits a memory limit because its aggregation table gets to big,
it splits its job, say in 2 (though this fanout can be configured), or it resorts
to spilling if no resource is available for the split.  When it splits,

> half of the key space and half of the input partition goes to the new child.

Reviewer: It would be good to clarify if/how the keyspace is partitioned across the initial M workers.

> Once split, the worker initiate a _continuous shuffle_, where each worker pushes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once split, the worker initiates a _continuous shuffle_, where it pushes
```

rows that it does not own to the owner of those rows.  At any point in time,
every worker knows the other N-1 workers in the job, how the keys are partitioned
across the workers, and its individual position in the set of workers.  Thus,
each worker knows where to send rows that it does not own.

To optimize the continuous shuffle, each worker keeps N-1 _peer tables_ to batch
the streaming updates.  As records arrive in this table, they can be aggregated
before transmission potentially reducing the overhead.  In general,
larger peer tables results in lower overhead.  A configuration
parameter controls the ratio of the size of the peer table storage to the
primary table.  Note that the peer tables do not need to all be the same size and
can shared a dynamic size to better optimize non-uniform data patterns.

> At end-of-stream, a worker flushes its caches and streams back its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At end-of-stream, a worker flushes its peer table contents and streams back its
```

table (perhaps mixing in any spills) to its parent in response to the
REST call that invoked that worker.  This process of
writing results may block if the parent is not yet done.  If so, when the
parent is done and ready, it will read the results from all of its children,
and propagate the merged results in sorted order to its parent and so forth.

The state required for reach worker to carry all this out is simply the list
of endpoints that exist and any point in time along with the key space

> partitioning strategy.  Because of the properties of decomposable aggregations,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
partitioning strategy.  Because of the properties of composable aggregations,
```

Author: We can change the name but I got this term here: 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1110.0725.pdf
